Added training on Braker3 (#5846)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/genome-annotation/tutorials/braker3/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: Genome annotation with Braker3
zenodo_link: https://zenodo.org/records/14770765
tags:
  - eukaryota
  - Braker3
  - jbrowse1

edam_ontology:
- topic_0196 # Sequence Assembly
- topic_0622 # Genomics
- topic_0362 # Genome annotation

questions:
    - How to annotate an eukaryotic genome with Braker3?
    - How to evaluate and visualize annotated genomic features?

objectives:
    - Load genome into Galaxy
    - Annotate genome with Braker3
    - Evaluate annotation quality with BUSCO
    - View annotations in JBrowse

time_estimation: 8h
level: Intermediate
key_points:
    - Braker3 allows to perform structural annotation of an eukaryotic genome

>     - BUSCO allows to inspect the quality of an annotation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - BUSCO and OMArk allow to inspect the quality of an annotation
```

contributions:
  authorship:
    - rlibouba
    - abretaud

  funding:
    - eurosciencegateway
abbreviations:
    GPU: Graphics Processing Unit
    UTR: Untranslated region
    
requirements:
 - type: internal
   topic_name: genome-annotation
   tutorials:
     - repeatmasker

subtopic: eukaryote
---

Annotating the eukaryotic genome represents a somewhat more complex challenge than that of prokaryotes, mainly due to the generally larger size of eukaryotic genomes and their greater number of genes. This annotation can be carried out at different levels of precision, ranging from simple identification of coding and non-coding parts to detailed structural labeling, including for example the precise location of exons, introns and other regulatory elements.

In this tutorial we will use a software tool called Braker3 to annotate the genome sequence of a small eukaryote: [*Mucor mucedo*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mucor_mucedo) (a fungal plant pathogen).

> [Braker3](https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/BRAKER) is a bioinformatics tool that uses RNA-seq and protein data to annotate genomes in a fully automated process. It integrates GeneMark-ETP and AUGUSTUS software to predict genes with a high degree of precision. By combining the results of these two tools, Braker3 generates a final file containing gene annotations with strong extrinsic support (i.e. based on external experimental data). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Braker3](https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/BRAKER) is a automated bioinformatics tool that uses RNA-seq and protein data to annotate genomes. It integrates GeneMark-ETP and AUGUSTUS software to predict genes with a high degree of precision. By combining the results of these two tools, Braker3 generates a final file containing gene annotations with strong extrinsic support (i.e. based on external experimental data). 
```

Braker3 facilitates genome annotation by leveraging transcriptomic and protein data to produce more reliable and robust gene predictions.

> In this tutorial, you will learn how to carry out a structural annotation of the genome and assess its quality. To make it easier to learn and to reduce the time taken to run the analyses, we use a lightweight dataset, which may result in a less complete annotation than in the context of analysis under real conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will learn how to perform structural annotation of the genome and assess its quality. To simplify learning and reduce analysis time, we will use a lightweight dataset, which may result in a less complete annotation than in the context of analysis under real conditions.
```

- A set of **protein sequences**, like UniProt/SwissProt. It is important to have good quality. The number of protein sequences has been reduced to reduce Braker3's execution time.

> <hands-on-title>Data upload</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/histories_create_new.md %}
>
> 2. Import the files from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}) or from
>    the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}`
>     -> `{{ page.title }}`):
>
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/records/14770765/files/genome.fasta
>    https://zenodo.org/records/14770765/files/RNASeq.bam
>    https://zenodo.org/records/14770765/files/protein_sequences.fasta
>    ```
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_via_link.md %}
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_from_data_library.md %}
>
{: .hands_on}

# Preparing RNAseq data

In this tutorial, the alignments from RNA-seq is already prepared. 
These data were obtained using the RNA STAR tool, the steps of which were described in the 
[Funannotate]({% link topics/genome-annotation/tutorials/funannotate/tutorial.md %}) tutorial. 

> When using Braker3 with STAR to align RNA-Seq data, the **--outSAMstrandField intronMotif** parameter must be added to RNA STAR. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using Braker3 with STAR to align RNA-Seq data, the **--outSAMstrandField intronMotif** parameter must be added. 
```

This parameter adds specific intron information to the alignment files (BAM). 
This information is necessary for Braker3 to correctly understand and use the alignments to annotate genes.
Without this parameter, Braker3 may not function correctly or may produce incomplete results.

# Structural annotation 

> We have a masked genome in fasta format, RNAseq sequence alignments in bam format and protein annotation in fasta format. We can run [**Braker3**](https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/BRAKER) to perform the structural annotation of the genome.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now have the following required inputs : 
- A masked genome in FASTA format
- RNAseq sequence alignments in BAM format 
- Protein annotation in FASTA format

With these files, We can run [**Braker3**](https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/BRAKER) to perform the structural annotation of the genome.

```

> <hands-on-title>Genome annotation with Braker3</hands-on-title>
> 
> 1. {% tool [Braker3](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/braker3/braker3/3.0.8+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Assembly to annotate"*: `genome_masked.fasta` (Input dataset)
>    - *"Species name"*: `Mucor mucedo`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"RNA-seq mapped to genome to train Augustus/GeneMark"*: `rnaseq.bam` (Input dataset)
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Proteins to map to genome"*: `SwissProt_subset.fasta` (Input dataset)
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Fungal genome"*: select `Yes`
>    - *"Output format"*: `GFF3`
>
{: .hands_on}

> <comment-title>on parameters</comment-title>
>

> > - If you're working with fungi, we recommend that you activate the **--fungus** parameter. This enables Braker3 to run the GeneMArk-ETP algorithm with a branch point model. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - If you are working with fungi, we recommend that you activate the **--fungus** parameter. This enables Braker3 to run the GeneMArk-ETP algorithm with a branch point model. 
```

{: .comment}

> <comment-title>Don't wait</comment-title>
>
> - This step will take a bit of time to run: it could take around 2 hours for this tutorial. While it runs, we can already schedule the following functional annotation steps. Galaxy will run them automatically as soon as the structural annotation is ready.
> - There are several reasons for this: the size of the genome, the quality and quantity of the RNA-Seq data, the supervised learning model for prediction, and more. 
{: .comment}

Braker3 generates an output file in GTF format by default. But it is possible to generate the output file in GFF3 output. This file contains informations on gene locations, exons, introns, etc.
GFF3 files are generally preferred for complex and varied annotations, while GTF is often used for transcript annotations in RNA-seq studies.

The GFF3 format is a standard bioinformatics format for storing genome annotations. Each row describes a genomic entity, with columns detailing its identifier, location, score and other attributes.

## Evaluation with **Busco**

> [BUSCO](http://busco.ezlab.org/) (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs) is a tool allowing to evaluate the quality of a genome assembly or of a genome annotation. By comparing genomes from 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[BUSCO](http://busco.ezlab.org/) (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs) is a widely tool allowing to evaluate the quality of a genome assembly and annotation. By comparing genomes from 
```

> various more or less related species, the authors determined sets of ortholog genes that are present in single copy in (almost) all the species of a clade (Bacteria, Fungi, Plants, Insects, Mammalians, …). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
various related and distantly related species, the authors determined sets of ortholog genes that are present in single copy in (almost) all the species of a clade (Bacteria, Fungi, Plants, Insects, Mammalians, …). 
```

> Most of these genes are essential for the organism to live, and are expected to be found in any newly sequenced and annotated genome from the corresponding clade. Using this data, BUSCO is able to evaluate the proportion of these essential genes (also named BUSCOs) found in a set of (predicted) transcript or protein sequences. This is a good evaluation of the “completeness” of the annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of these genes are essential for the organism to live, and are expected to be found in any newly sequenced and annotated genome from the corresponding clade. Using this data, BUSCO evaluates the "completeness"  of genome annotation by assessing the proportion of these essential genes (also named BUSCOs) found in a set of (predicted) transcript or protein sequences. 
```

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: Genome annotation with Braker3
zenodo_link: https://zenodo.org/records/14770765
tags:
  - eukaryota
  - Braker3
  - jbrowse1

edam_ontology:
- topic_0196 # Sequence Assembly
- topic_0622 # Genomics
- topic_0362 # Genome annotation

questions:
    - How to annotate an eukaryotic genome with Braker3?
    - How to evaluate and visualize annotated genomic features?

objectives:
    - Load genome into Galaxy
    - Annotate genome with Braker3
    - Evaluate annotation quality with BUSCO
    - View annotations in JBrowse

time_estimation: 8h
level: Intermediate
key_points:
    - Braker3 allows to perform structural annotation of an eukaryotic genome
    - BUSCO and OMArk allow to inspect the quality of an annotation

> contributions:
>   authorship:
>     - rlibouba
>     - abretaud

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
contributions:
  authorship:
    - rlibouba
    - abretaud
  reviewing:
    - Deeptivarshney 
```

- A masked genome in FASTA format
- RNAseq sequence alignments in BAM format 
- Protein annotation in FASTA format

With these files, We can run [**Braker3**](https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/BRAKER) to perform the structural annotation of the genome.

> <hands-on-title>Genome annotation with Braker3</hands-on-title>
> 
> 1. {% tool [Braker3](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/braker3/braker3/3.0.8+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Assembly to annotate"*: `genome_masked.fasta` (Input dataset)
>    - *"Species name"*: `Mucor mucedo`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"RNA-seq mapped to genome to train Augustus/GeneMark"*: `rnaseq.bam` (Input dataset)
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Proteins to map to genome"*: `SwissProt_subset.fasta` (Input dataset)
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Fungal genome"*: select `Yes`
>    - *"Output format"*: `GFF3`
>
{: .hands_on}

> <comment-title>on parameters</comment-title>
>
> - If you are working with fungi, we recommend that you activate the **--fungus** parameter. This enables Braker3 to run the GeneMArk-ETP algorithm with a branch point model. 
{: .comment}

> <comment-title>Don't wait</comment-title>
>

> > - This step will take a bit of time to run: it could take around 2 hours for this tutorial. While it runs, we can already schedule the following functional annotation steps. Galaxy will run them automatically as soon as the structural annotation is ready.

Reviewer 2: Is there any way we can downscale the tutorial input data to speed this up, or is this wait unavoidable?

Author: I have reduced the dataset as much as possible. If I reduce it more, braker3 doesn't work.

Reviewer 2: ok, no problem, thanks for doing that :+1:

{: .comment}

# Visualisation with a genome browser

You can visualize the annotation generated using a genomic browser like [JBrowse](https://jbrowse.org/jbrowse1.html).
This browser enables you to navigate along the chromosomes of the genome and view the structure of each predicted gene.

> <hands-on-title>JBrowse visualisation</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [JBrowse](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/jbrowse/jbrowse/1.16.11+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Reference genome to display"*: `Use a genome from history`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Select the reference genome"*: `genome_masked.fasta` (Input dataset)
>    - In *"Track Group"*:
>        - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Track Group"*
>            - *"Track Category"*: `Annotation`
>            - In *"Annotation Track"*:
>                - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Annotation Track"*
>                    - *"Track Type"*: `GFF/GFF3/BED Features`
>                        - {% icon param-file %} *"GFF/GFF3/BED Track Data"*: `gff3` (output of **Braker3** {% icon tool %})
{: .hands_on}

> Click on the newly created dataset's eye to display it. You will see a JBrowse genome browser. You can have a look at the [JBrowse tutorial]({% link topics/visualisation/tutorials/jbrowse/tutorial.md %}) for a more in-depth description of JBrowse.

Reviewer 2: You can also embed JBrowse directly in the tutorial, so learners can see what it's supposed to look like. Could be a nice addition here.

Example in this tutorial: https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/assembly/tutorials/ecoli_comparison/tutorial.html#jbrowse

Author: Thanks for the idea! I'm going to integrate JBrowse

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: Genome annotation with Braker3
zenodo_link: https://zenodo.org/records/14770765
tags:
  - eukaryota
  - Braker3
  - jbrowse1

edam_ontology:
- topic_0196 # Sequence Assembly
- topic_0622 # Genomics
- topic_0362 # Genome annotation

questions:
    - How to annotate an eukaryotic genome with Braker3?
    - How to evaluate and visualize annotated genomic features?

objectives:
    - Load genome into Galaxy
    - Annotate genome with Braker3
    - Evaluate annotation quality with BUSCO
    - View annotations in JBrowse

time_estimation: 8h
level: Intermediate
key_points:
    - Braker3 allows to perform structural annotation of an eukaryotic genome
    - BUSCO and OMArk allow to inspect the quality of an annotation
contributions:
  authorship:
    - rlibouba
    - abretaud
  reviewing:

>     - Deeptivarshney 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - deeptivarshney 
```

> <hands-on-title>JBrowse visualisation</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [JBrowse](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/jbrowse/jbrowse/1.16.11+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Reference genome to display"*: `Use a genome from history`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Select the reference genome"*: `genome_masked.fasta` (Input dataset)
>    - In *"Track Group"*:
>        - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Track Group"*
>            - *"Track Category"*: `Annotation`
>            - In *"Annotation Track"*:
>                - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Annotation Track"*
>                    - *"Track Type"*: `GFF/GFF3/BED Features`
>                        - {% icon param-file %} *"GFF/GFF3/BED Track Data"*: `gff3` (output of **Braker3** {% icon tool %})
{: .hands_on}

Click on the newly created dataset's eye to display it. You will see a JBrowse genome browser. You can have a look at the [JBrowse tutorial]({% link topics/visualisation/tutorials/jbrowse/tutorial.md %}) for a more in-depth description of JBrowse.

We have embedded a copy of the resulting JBrowse here, if something went wrong during one of the steps you can always just check this output:

> {% snippet topics/visualisation/faqs/visualizations_jbrowse_annotation_braker3.html datadir="data" %}

Reviewer 2: hi @rlibouba, sorry, we did not document this feature well, but if you replace this line with this, it should work:
 
```suggestion
{% snippet topics/visualisation/faqs/visualizations_jbrowse.html datadir="data" tracks="DNA%2Caa6aca08d6fd82b94c7a86712a632760_0"%}
```

Reviewer 2: and then you can remove your copy of the faq again

Author: Thanks for these explanations

level: Intermediate
key_points:
    - Braker3 allows to perform structural annotation of an eukaryotic genome
    - BUSCO and OMArk allow to inspect the quality of an annotation
contributions:
  authorship:
    - rlibouba
    - abretaud
  reviewing:
    - deeptivarshney
    - shiltemann

  funding:
    - eurosciencegateway
abbreviations:
    GPU: Graphics Processing Unit
    UTR: Untranslated region
    
requirements:
 - type: internal
   topic_name: genome-annotation
   tutorials:
     - repeatmasker

subtopic: eukaryote
---

Annotating the eukaryotic genome represents a somewhat more complex challenge than that of prokaryotes, mainly due to the generally larger size of eukaryotic genomes and their greater number of genes. This annotation can be carried out at different levels of precision, ranging from simple identification of coding and non-coding parts to detailed structural labeling, including for example the precise location of exons, introns and other regulatory elements.

In this tutorial we will use a software tool called Braker3 to annotate the genome sequence of a small eukaryote: [*Mucor mucedo*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mucor_mucedo) (a fungal plant pathogen).

> [Braker3](https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/BRAKER) is a automated bioinformatics tool that uses RNA-seq and protein data to annotate genomes. It integrates GeneMark-ETP and AUGUSTUS software to predict genes with a high degree of precision. By combining the results of these two tools, Braker3 generates a final file containing gene annotations with strong extrinsic support (i.e. based on external experimental data). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Braker3](https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/BRAKER) is an automated bioinformatics tool that uses RNA-seq and protein data to annotate genomes. It integrates GeneMark-ETP and AUGUSTUS software to predict genes with a high degree of precision. By combining the results of these two tools, Braker3 generates a final file containing gene annotations with strong extrinsic support (i.e. based on external experimental data). 
```

Braker3 facilitates genome annotation by leveraging transcriptomic and protein data to produce more reliable and robust gene predictions.

> In this tutorial, you will learn how to perform structural annotation of the genome and assess its quality. To simplify learning and reduce analysis time, we will use a lightweight dataset, which may result in a less complete annotation than in the context of analysis under real conditions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will learn how to perform structural annotation of the genome and assess its quality. To simplify learning and reduce analysis time, we will use a lightweight dataset, which may result in a less complete annotation than in the context of an analysis under real conditions.
```

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Data upload

To annotate our genome using Braker3, we will use the following files:

- The **genome sequence** in fasta format. For best results, the sequence should be soft-masked beforehand. You can learn how to do it by following the [RepeatMasker tutorial]({% link topics/genome-annotation/tutorials/repeatmasker/tutorial.md %}). For this tutorial, we will try to annotate the genome assembled in the [Flye assembly tutorial]({% link topics/assembly/tutorials/flye-assembly/tutorial.md %}). The size of the genome has been reduced to reduce Braker3 execution time.

> - Some **RNAseq data** in fastq format. We will align them on the genome, and Braker3 will use it as evidence to annotate genes.

Reviewer 3: Wait, you're using a bam file below

> - A set of **protein sequences**, like UniProt/SwissProt. It is important to have good quality. The number of protein sequences has been reduced to reduce Braker3's execution time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A set of **protein sequences**, like UniProt/SwissProt. It is important to have good quality, curated sequences here, and the UniProt/SwissProt databank fits very well. For this tutorial, we have prepared a subset of this databank to speed up computing, but you should use UniProt/SwissProt for real life analysis.
```

> <hands-on-title>Data upload</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/histories_create_new.md %}
>
> 2. Import the files from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}) or from
>    the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}`
>     -> `{{ page.title }}`):
>
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/records/14770765/files/genome.fasta
>    https://zenodo.org/records/14770765/files/RNASeq.bam
>    https://zenodo.org/records/14770765/files/protein_sequences.fasta
>    ```
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_via_link.md %}
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_from_data_library.md %}
>
{: .hands_on}

# Preparing RNAseq data

In this tutorial, the alignments from RNA-seq is already prepared. 
These data were obtained using the RNA STAR tool, the steps of which were described in the 
[Funannotate]({% link topics/genome-annotation/tutorials/funannotate/tutorial.md %}) tutorial. 

> When using Braker3 with STAR to align RNA-Seq data, the **--outSAMstrandField intronMotif** parameter must be added. 

Reviewer 3: You should tell which option to use on the star galaxy tool

Without this parameter, Braker3 may not function correctly or may produce incomplete results.

# Structural annotation 

We now have the following required inputs : 
- A masked genome in FASTA format
- RNAseq sequence alignments in BAM format 
- Protein annotation in FASTA format

With these files, We can run [**Braker3**](https://github.com/Gaius-Augustus/BRAKER) to perform the structural annotation of the genome.

> <hands-on-title>Genome annotation with Braker3</hands-on-title>
> 
> 1. {% tool [Braker3](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/braker3/braker3/3.0.8+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Assembly to annotate"*: `genome_masked.fasta` (Input dataset)
>    - *"Species name"*: `Mucor mucedo`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"RNA-seq mapped to genome to train Augustus/GeneMark"*: `rnaseq.bam` (Input dataset)
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Proteins to map to genome"*: `SwissProt_subset.fasta` (Input dataset)
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Fungal genome"*: select `Yes`
>    - *"Output format"*: `GFF3`
>
{: .hands_on}

> <comment-title>on parameters</comment-title>
>

> > - If you are working with fungi, we recommend that you activate the **--fungus** parameter. This enables Braker3 to run the GeneMArk-ETP algorithm with a branch point model. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> - If you are working with fungi, we recommend that you activate the **--fungus** parameter. This enables Braker3 to run the GeneMark-ETP algorithm with a branch point model. 
```

GFF3 files are generally preferred for complex and varied annotations, while GTF is often used for transcript annotations in RNA-seq studies.

The GFF3 format is a standard bioinformatics format for storing genome annotations. Each row describes a genomic entity, with columns detailing its identifier, location, score and other attributes.

## Evaluation with **Busco**

[BUSCO](http://busco.ezlab.org/) (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs) is a widely used tool to evaluate the quality of a genome assembly and annotation. By comparing genomes from 
various related and distantly related species, the authors determined sets of ortholog genes that are present in single copy in (almost) all the species of a clade (Bacteria, Fungi, Plants, Insects, Mammalians, …). 
Most of these genes are essential for the organism to live, and are expected to be found in any newly sequenced and annotated genome from the corresponding clade. Using this data, BUSCO evaluates the "completeness" of genome annotation by assessing the proportion of these essential genes (also named BUSCOs) found in a set of (predicted) transcript or protein sequences. 

> As an alternative for genomes only one can use [**compleasm**](https://github.com/huangnengCSU/compleasm) with the same BUSCO gene sets, as compleasm is a bit more sensitive and thus allows finding slightly more conserved genes.

Reviewer 3: I'd skip compleasm as it's only for genomes, and here we look at an annotation
